updating chapter data visualization (#12)
r4ds/bookclub-r4ds: 03-data_visualisation.Rmd

- coordinates: x and y
- size
- shape
- color
- fill
- alpha (transparency)
- stroke
- linetype
- group
- show.legend 
- others, sometimes specific to a geom

Use the `mapping` argument and the `aes` function to map an aesthetic to a variable in `data`.

Or assign the <DATA> in the `ggplot()` function and the `mapping` in one of the <GEOM_FUNCTION>:

    ggplot(data = <DATA>) + 
    <GEOM_FUNCTION>(mapping = aes(<MAPPINGS>))
    

As an example we load the data provided in {ggplot2}: 

    ggplot2::mpg    
    
Display the data head of the first 3 rows:
```{r}
head(mpg,3)
```
    

Add a <GEOM_FUNCTION> to `ggplot(<DATA>)` with:

```{r}
ggplot(data=mpg) +
  geom_point(mapping = aes(x = displ, y = hwy), color = "blue")
```

    
    
Here the color appears outside the **mapping** but what if it will be set inside of it?
    
A super common error: Trying to set the color *inside* the `aes` call results in random effects because `aes()` automatically figures out the necessary **scale** for your data.
  
  
```{r bad-mapping}
ggplot(data = mpg) + 
  geom_point(mapping = aes(x = displ, y = hwy, color = "blue"))
```

---------------------------------------

## Common problems

> What is very important when deciding for a visualization of your data?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is very important when deciding on a visualization of your data?
```

![](images/data-science-explore.png){width=90%} 

> To avoid the most of your trouble, the best suggestion is to have the data ready for your visualization to come to live. So that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you create your visualization, you need to have your data ready. We'll learn more about these steps in upcoming chapters:```

- import your data

> - tidy the set in a way to have your variables ready to display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- tidy the data to have your variables ready to display
```

- transform the data as needed

> - visualize them with a plot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- visualize the data with a plot
```

### Coordinate systems

Add Coordinate systems to your `ggplot` with:

    coord_flip()
    coord_quickmap()
    coord_polar()
    coord_fixed()
    

By default, `{ggplot}` uses `coord_cartesian()` but you can add other functions:

- `coord_flip()` can be useful to quickly flip orientations (although this is less necessary in modern `{ggplot}` than when this book was written; now there's an "orientation" argument that is usually guessed properly if you leave it blank)
- `coord_quickmap()` does proper transformations to work with lat/long data.
- `coord_polar()` for circular plots, which are almost always a bad idea but they tend to look cool
- `coord_fixed()` set the same limits to both axis

-------------------------------

### Theme

Once your data are imported, tidied and transformed adeguately for obtaing desired visualization you can start setting up a plot with extra features:

```{r}
?theme
```

It is possible to add a `theme()` function to your `ggplot`, this is done to customize the non-data components of your plots:
 

- titles
- labels
- fonts
- background
- gridlines
- legends
- ...

For example if you would like to customize the background of your plot:

```{r}

> ggplot()+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ggplot() +
```

>   geom_blank()+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  geom_blank() +
```

>   theme(plot.background = element_rect(color="red",size=2,fill="gold"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  theme(plot.background = element_rect(color = "red", size = 2, fill = "gold"),
```

>         panel.background = element_rect(color="grey",size=5,fill="darkblue"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        panel.background = element_rect(color = "grey", size = 5, fill = "darkblue"))
```

```

Or you can customize a `theme_`, there are many different themes provided by defauld by `ggplo2` such as:

    theme_classic()
    theme_minimal()
    theme_void()

> just to name a few, those function then can be further customize by adding the simple `theme` customization function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
just to name a few, those function then can be further customize by adding the `theme` customization function.
```
